Add Mastodon SSO setup instructions to docs (#14594)
matrix-org/synapse: docs/openid.md

        display_name_template: "{{ user.first_name }} {{ user.last_name }}"
        email_template: "{{ user.email }}"
```

### Mastodon / Fediverse

Single-Sign On provided by [Mastodon](https://docs.joinmastodon.org/) and other Fediverse websites work with Synapse, provided they have implemented the [Mastodon OAuth API](https://docs.joinmastodon.org/spec/oauth/).

> This example assumes: 
> * the Mastodon instance website URL is `https://your.mastodon.instance.url/` 
> * you want to create an App titled *my_synapse_app*
> 
> The first step is to create an App using the Mastodon's [Create an application API](https://docs.joinmastodon.org/methods/apps/#create). There are several ways to do this but in the example below we are using CURL.
> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The first step is to register Synapse as an application with your Mastodon instance, using the [Create an application API](https://docs.joinmastodon.org/methods/apps/#create) (see also [here](https://docs.joinmastodon.org/client/token/)). There are several ways to do this, but in the example below we are using CURL.

This example assumes that:
* the Mastodon instance website URL is `https://your.mastodon.instance.url`, and
* Synapse will be registered as an app named `my_synapse_app`.

```

Send the following request:
```sh
curl -d "client_name=my_synapse_app&redirect_uris=https://[synapse_public_baseurl]/_synapse/client/oidc/callback" -X POST https://your.mastodon.instance.url/api/v1/apps
```

You should get the following response, and you should write down:
```json

> {"client_id":"someclientid_123","client_secret":"someclientsecret_123","id":"12345","name":"my_synapse_app","redirect_uri":"https://[synapse_public_baseurl]/_synapse/client/oidc/callback","website":null,"vapid_key":"somerandomvapidkey_123"}

Author: I can't figure this one out. I don't have it anywhere in Synapse config and the auth works perfectly. 
Here's the PR and issue related to it, could you check them out?
https://github.com/mastodon/mastodon/pull/10058
https://github.com/mastodon/mastodon/issues/8785
Could you please check them out? From what I understand, it's safe to ignore. Seems to be related to Push stuff.

> {"client_id":"someclientid_123","client_secret":"someclientsecret_123","id":"12345","name":"my_synapse_app","redirect_uri":"https://[synapse_public_baseurl]/_synapse/client/oidc/callback","website":null,"vapid_key":"somerandomvapidkey_123"}

Reviewer: Seems to come from https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/draft-thomson-webpush-vapid

Agreed that it's related to push and not needed here. Thanks for finding those PRs.

```

As the Synapse login mechanism needs an attribute to uniquely identify users, and that endpoint does not return a sub property, an alternative subject_claim has to be set. Your Synapse configuration should be the following:

```yaml
oidc_providers:
  - idp_id: fediverse

>     idp_name: "Fediverse Example"

Reviewer: ```
  - idp_id: my_mastodon
    idp_name: "Mastodon Instance Example"
```

    discover: false

>     issuer: "https://your.mastodon.instance.url/@admin"

Reviewer: Is the name `@admin` always correct, or can this depend on the how the mastodon instance is configured?

Author: I actually wonder if the `issuer` is used anywhere with this particular auth flow. Since Mastodon auth is undocumented currently, I got the example config from a foreign website and the example config had `https://instance/@admin` so I just went with it, and it worked with my setup too. 

When I tried removing `issuer` from Synapse config, homeserver refused to start, stating `'issuer' is a required property`. I looked into [Husky Android app](https://git.sr.ht/~captainepoch/husky) source and I can't see anything related to issuer (even when doing "grep -ri "issuer") . 

```kotlin
private fun redirectUserToAuthorizeAndLogin(domain: String, clientId: String) {
    /* To authorize this app and log in it's necessary to redirect to the domain given,
     * login there, and the server will redirect back to the app with its response. */
    val endpoint = MastodonApi.ENDPOINT_AUTHORIZE
    val parameters = mapOf(
        "client_id" to clientId,
        "redirect_uri" to oauthRedirectUri,
        "response_type" to "code",
        "scope" to OAUTH_SCOPES
    )
    val url = "https://" + domain + endpoint + "?" + toQueryString(parameters)
    val uri = Uri.parse(url)
    if (!openInCustomTab(uri, this)) {
        val viewIntent = Intent(Intent.ACTION_VIEW, uri)
        if (viewIntent.resolveActivity(packageManager) != null) {
            startActivity(viewIntent)
        } else {
            binding.domainEditText.error = getString(R.string.error_no_web_browser_found)
            setLoading(false)
        }
    }
}
```

Reviewer: https://github.com/matrix-org/synapse/blob/cc3a52b33df72bb4230367536b924a6d1f510d36/synapse/config/oidc.py#L340-L342

So this is only used to "validate tokens". Is it used?

- Not used [here](https://github.com/matrix-org/synapse/blob/09de2aecb05cb46e0513396e2675b24c8beedb68/synapse/handlers/oidc.py#L389-L398) because we already have a client secret configured
- Used in various places if backchannel logout is enabled---but it isn't configured, and [defaults to false](https://github.com/matrix-org/synapse/blob/cc3a52b33df72bb4230367536b924a6d1f510d36/synapse/config/oidc.py#L297).
- Not used [here](https://github.com/matrix-org/synapse/blob/09de2aecb05cb46e0513396e2675b24c8beedb68/synapse/handlers/oidc.py#L586-L590) because discovery is disabled

So I don't think it's used. Let's leave it as it is.

    client_id: "someclientid_123"    
    client_secret: "someclientsecret_123"
    authorization_endpoint: "https://your.mastodon.instance.url/oauth/authorize"
    token_endpoint: "https://your.mastodon.instance.url/oauth/token"
    userinfo_endpoint: "https://your.mastodon.instance.url/api/v1/accounts/verify_credentials"
    scopes: ["read"]
    user_mapping_provider:
      config:
        subject_claim: "id"

> ```

Reviewer: `````suggestion
```

Note that the fields `client_id` and `client_secret` are taken from the CURL response above.
`````

```

You should receive a response similar to the following. Make sure to save it.
```json
{"client_id":"someclientid_123","client_secret":"someclientsecret_123","id":"12345","name":"my_synapse_app","redirect_uri":"https://[synapse_public_baseurl]/_synapse/client/oidc/callback","website":null,"vapid_key":"somerandomvapidkey_123"}
```

As the Synapse login mechanism needs an attribute to uniquely identify users, and Mastodon's endpoint does not return a `sub` property, an alternative `subject_claim` has to be set. Your Synapse configuration should include the following:

```yaml
oidc_providers:
  - idp_id: my_mastodon
    idp_name: "Mastodon Instance Example"
    discover: false
    issuer: "https://your.mastodon.instance.url/@admin"
    client_id: "someclientid_123"    
    client_secret: "someclientsecret_123"
    authorization_endpoint: "https://your.mastodon.instance.url/oauth/authorize"
    token_endpoint: "https://your.mastodon.instance.url/oauth/token"
    userinfo_endpoint: "https://your.mastodon.instance.url/api/v1/accounts/verify_credentials"
    scopes: ["read"]
    user_mapping_provider:
      config:

>         subject_claim: "id"

Reviewer 2: Is this an internal ID or something the user can change? (Usually you want something immutable.)

Author: Oh and also, if you prefer, we can add `localpart_template` and `display_name_template`. I don't have those in my setup, though.

Reviewer 2: Thanks for answering! I'm not sure if adding the `localpart_template` is needed, will leave that to @DMRobertson.
